---
layout: post
title: Programmatic Beauty
last_update: 2019-12-09
---
I am sometimes overwhelmed by the sheer beauty of a concept in computer science to such a
degree that I am moved to tears at points. To be totally honest it is probably this 
reaction to the beauty of computer science that makes me love learning more than any sort
of pretense of productivity (though that matters too).

In the interest of sharing the things I love with others I have created this little
overview of the subjects that I find most beautiful and profound in computer science. I
will also include links to things that I have found explain the subjects.

## Models of Computation
So a good thing to start off our discussion of the beauty of computers is the question of
what a computer is. This is, for obvious reasons, something that has been considered by 
people far more intelligent than me for quite a bit longer than I have existed.

### Finite State Machines
A FSM ~~has touched us all with it's noodly appendages~~ is exactly what it sounds like, a
machine with a finite number of states. That is to say that the machine, based upon some
input may go to any finite number of states during execution. Finite state machines do not
need to halt during the execution of their tasks and may loop endlessly between a number of
the states that they may be in.

Among the set of finite state machines are regular expressions and flowcharts. You can
imagine a finite state machine as a flowchart, though that ultimately would be limiting as
the set of finite state machines includes things that are rather thoroughly not flow charts.
Rather imagine it like a

Incidentally all computers are actually just finite state machines that have delusions of
being Turing machines.

### Turing Machines
So what is a Turing machine and why do computers have Turing machines?

Well a Turing machine is a machine that can do all computable things.

It is a machine with a head that can read and write to a infinitely long tape. It reads
symbols one at a time and, based on the symbols, moves the head and places symbols on the
tape. This really simple machine can do all the (computable) things.

So what are all computable things.

That is to say that it can do literally anything that you can do by following a some
algorithm in finite time, which quite probably is also everything that you can do (well
except for when you might output random garbage data), though some *heathens* insist 
otherwise. Of course a function that is *computable* may not be *efficiently computable*
and indeed may take a little while. Things such as cracking AES-256 are *computable* but
may take you a little while longer than an evening if you tried it on your laptop. Though
eventually it will halt. Probably sometime when the sun expands to engulf the earth and
the heat death of the universe, but still, it will halt.

That also is to say that there are a rather large (in fact 2^aleph-null) set of things 
that a Turing machine simply cannot do. Things such as the Entschedungsproblem or the
Busy Beaver function are non computable. This is to say that you cannot find their answer
by some algorithm. That the knowledge of their answers must come either from some
theoretical hypercomputer or chance, and even more distressingly the correctness of the 
answer not even be verifiable.

Though fear not dear reader, for we have an *infinite* number of computable things that we
can mess around with. Though here we do have one more constraint that makes that set much
smaller than infinity. You see, the universe appears to be finite, or at least the bit we
can know due to C being as it is. Thus we cannot construct a Turing machine with an infinite
tape, but rather we must settle with Turing machines with finite tapes, which then are
simply finite state machines.

"But wait", you may say, "I heard *x* was Turing complete", and indeed you probably have
and indeed those people are wrong. Mind, they probably even know that they are wrong. Now,
dear reader, you may be experiencing a sense of betrayal. I would like to 

Here we see the first signs of the true, mathematical beauty of computer science. The 
ability to derive complex behavior from ultimately simple sets of rules.

## Lisp
(Lisp ((is that strange language) with (all the parentheses everywhere)))

No, that isn't right, Lisp means List Processor.

Doesn't it do more than just lists? Like something with ASTs?

Wait, it has something about data as code too, right?

To the average person all programming languages are alien, but only Lisp manages to seem
alien to most programmers as well. To many they do not see the point, what is it with
the ugly parentheses and terrible syntax? What is a cdr and why is it have a car? Why are
so many programmers insane and thus love this ugly, terrible language?

The answer to the last one is simple, it is because Lisp is actually quite beautiful (and
the people who love Lisp are insane).

Lisp represents everything as a linked lists. Code is just linked lists that the language
then executes. The parentheses are simply a notation for these lists. In the list world
'(this is a list) and (this-is-a-function '(that operates on a list)).

Functions can work with lists of instructions just like they would with any other list.
You can basically concatenate functions the same way you may concatenate lists if you want
and Lisp will let you do so freely.

In Lisp the lack of syntax is not a bug, but rather its ultimate feature.

Macros in Lisp are perhaps the ultimate expression of the language. They can take a set
of input arguments in the form of code, preform arbitrary computation on them, and then 
return a set of outputs that are then executed by the computer. Lisp macros consequently
lead us into our next section, code as data.

### Code as Data
Code as data is a common concept in the Lisp world. Code is data. But what does that
actually *mean* on a fundamental level? I mean it's obviously true that code is in fact
data: code exists in a computer and is executed by it; hence data. But with Lisp there is
a somewhat deeper meaning than the surface level, in Lisp the code is written as lists of
instructions that are executed.

And lists are what Lisp excels at processing.

Thus lisp allows you to manipulate code as naturally as it might manipulate any other bit
of data in the world, making it easy to extend the language with a variety of abstractions
via macros.

Macros are functions that take bits of lisp code, preform arbitrary computation on them, 
and then spit out some other lisp code at the macroexpansion phase of lisp evaluation. Now
what does that *mean* in a practical sense. Sure, it's a good paper reactor, but will it
ever become a real reactor? ~~Well yes, it too become become heavy and bloated, just look
at Emacs.~~ Yes, and it means that you can write code far more efficiently than you could
in the past by creating as many layers of abstraction as you want around something with
total freedom to design whatever data structures you desire.

This is the beauty of lisp, it's not a language, but rather a toolkit for defining your
own little dialect to solve your problems.

### Data as Code
In a way every program is a finite state machine that receives information from the
outside world as its code. When you write a file system and tools to manage it those
tools parse the system in a way not dissimilar to a language.


---

So as a final note, I hope that those of you who managed to stick through this post to the
end find some beauty in computer science. If you are not in in computer science and found 
these things to be beautiful as well, I would suggest that you look into it for the sense
of beauty gained from this post versus the sense gained from experience is as the beauty
of a particular vista in photo versus that same vista in person.
