---
layout: post
title: Making a Jekyll Blog
last_update: 2019-12-06
---

I have always wanted a more efficent platform for making a static website than either
throwing together some terrible HTML directly alongside a little bit of my own atrocious 
CSS to make something. I also hate using PHP so Wordpress was pretty much out. This left
me with no out of the box options and thus I was thrown into the depths of despair by 
this. How could there be nothing that fit my use case exactly, the horror, the horror.

Eventually I recovered (some) of my sanity and decided to try and build my own system, 
foolishly.

So I thought and am still of the opinion that largely a website is merely a decorated
way to display text and nothing more than that, barring interactive features. 
Terminals display text pretty well. Why not write a program that would share my terminal
over the web? Well, not my terminal, but a terminal.

So I set to work on my setup. To sandbox the users I would run them in a docker container
that would probably not be a huge issue. To further keep this dumpster fire away from me
I decided to run it on a remote server with a script that would simply automatically 
provision a new server for every update and delete the old server automatically. I got to
work and finished it in a day and in a way that would probably make the creators of Alpine
Linux and Docker turn in their graves.

And thus I had my own text based blog.

This did not end well. It was difficult to update and honestly a squandering of the
potential of the design. I should have made it use a more common framework such as wetty
to display the terminal. I should have designed it to run in a docker container (yes,
recursive docker containers). I should have made it use EMACS. Really brilliant stuff.

On the other hand Jekyll is easy to work with, fun, and efficient. 

Jekyll is what this blog is based on and the 
[theme](https://github.com/rphlmr/jekyll-gruvbox-theme) used was available on GitHub, free
and easy to just use as a drop in theme for my blog.

My only complaint is that it uses ruby instead of rust, the most moral language to ever
have been invented.

Errata:
Fixed sentence fragment and cliché phrases.
